.TH COZENAGE 1 "February 2026" "Cozenage" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cozenage \- Scheme-derived REPL and code runner
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cozenage
.RI [ option " ...] [" file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cozenage
is a Scheme-derived, Lisp-like programming language written in C.
It is designed primarily as an educational and exploratory implementation,
providing a small core language extended through libraries of
dynamically loadable modules.

Cozenage borrows heavily from Scheme, particularly R5RS and R7RS, but is not
fully standard-compliant. Where practical, Scheme semantics and conventions
are followed, with deliberate deviations made for clarity, simplicity,
implementation constraints, and inclinations of the author.

Users familiar with Scheme or other Lisp dialects should find Cozenage
immediately familiar.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-library
Preload Cozenage libraries at startup.
This option requires a comma-delimited list of library names.
Accepted values are:
.IR bits ,
.IR cxr ,
.IR file ,
.IR lazy ,
.IR math ,
.IR random ,
.IR system ,
and
.IR time .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display a short usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B COZENAGE_LIB_PATH
If set, this variable specifies the directory
to search for dynamically loadable Cozenage modules.
.SH USAGE
To start an interactive REPL:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ cozenage
.RE
.fi
.PP
To interpret a Scheme source file:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ cozenage my_program.scm
.RE
.fi
.PP
Cozenage will attempt to run any file argument as Scheme code, regardless
of filename extension.
.SH FEATURES
Cozenage provides a small but expressive core language with the following
notable features:
.PP
.RS
\(bu Proper tail-call optimization
.br
\(bu eval / apply evaluation model
.br
\(bu Lisp-style, non-hygienic macros via \fBdefmacro\fP
.br
\(bu Interactive REPL with multi-line editing, persistent history,
and tab completion
.br
\(bu Garbage collection via the Boehm-Demers-Weiser GC
.br
\(bu UTF-8 Unicode support
.RE
.PP
The numeric system includes integers, rationals, reals, and complex numbers,
with native big integer support. Arbitrary-precision rationals and reals are
a work in progress.
.SH PHILOSOPHY
Cozenage prioritizes internal consistency, approachability, and educational
value over exhaustive standards compliance.
Its design emphasizes clarity over completeness, a modest core language,
and practical, predictable Lisp semantics.
.SH BUGS
The author strongly prefers that bug reports be filed on the issue tracker at the project's GitHub page:
.PP
.RS
https://github.com/DarrenKirby/cozenage
.RE
.PP
to keep them organized, centralized, categorized, and publicly accessible. However, for those
unable, or disinclined to use the GitHub interface, bug preports can also be E-mailed to:
.PP
.RS
<cozenage@dragonbyte.ca>
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
The full Cozenage documentation and source code are available via the
project repository.
